The Cult of Leadership and the Downfall of Workism
Let’s see what’s underneath the cult of leadership, and to expose the old Testament, bronze age thinking at the core of hierarchy.
Behind the discourse about new ways of working, employee engagement, innovation, and organization, there lies a deep-seated belief — one that often goes completely unexamined — namely, the central role of leaders in all human endeavors, and perhaps especially in business.
Arising from this singular premise is the cult of leadership, which starts with the veneration of an idealized leader archetype embodying all the good attributes of Steve Jobs, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and Katniss Everdeen, but leaving out all the negatives of any specific individuals. And, more importantly, the cult of leadership relies on a ritualized way of thinking that never turns over the Big Rock to see what’s underneath, and to expose the old Testament, bronze age thinking at the core of hierarchy.
If we believe in a class of leaders who are endowed genetically, emotionally, financially, or technically to lead everyone else, and if we agree to structure our businesses (and societies) so that we cede sole legitimacy to leaders to make our decisions for us, and who define what our experience of work, participation, and involvement will be, then we become cultists, and as complicit in the outcome as those who are leading us.
I say this is a cult because the thinking involved is magical, like religious thought. It’s not based on evidence, per se, but faith and folklore.
Here’s a piece from the news that sparked this post: recent analysis shows that the relationship between corporate performance and CEO pay is upside down:
Theo Francis, Best-Paid CEOs Run Some of Worst-Performing Companies
The best-paid CEOs tend to run some of the worst-performing companies and vice versa — even when pay and performance are measured over the course of many years, according to a new study.
The analysis, from corporate-governance research firm MSCI, examined the pay of some 800 CEOs at 429 large and midsize U.S. companies during the decade ending in 2014, and also looked at the total shareholder return of the companies during the same period.
MSCI found that $100 invested in the 20% of companies with the highest-paid CEOs would have grown to $265 over 10 years. The same amount invested in the companies with the lowest-paid CEOs would have grown to $367. The report is expected to be released as early as Monday.
I look forward to reading the report, but one conclusion is inescapable: the pay of these CEOs is too high. But I will go further: the pay of CEOs across the board is too high, even in the cases where it may seem less egregious that the example discovered by MSCI. But we operate in a society where CEO pay is preposterously high, and we more or less accept that as a necessary element of the cult of leadership.
But what if ‘leading’ is not class or caste membership, but simply an activity that any or all of us can perform as needed? A behavior that does not exclusively characterize those that display it, anymore than literacy or numeracy does? What if ‘leading’ is a capability built into decision-making processes rather than the god-given right of overly talkative tall men with good teeth and senatorial hair?
What if ‘leading’ is a capability built into decision-making processes rather than the god-given right of overly talkative tall men with good teeth and senatorial hair?
The final reflection that I will offer at this point about the cult of leadership is that perhaps the time has come for us to dethrone the ‘leader’ in our thinking, for us to step back from the notion of a caste of leaders in bespoke suits, $400 haircuts, and Italian shoes who direct the affairs of the enterprise and who directly or indirectly control the work lives of everyone else.
Perhaps, today, in the twenty-first century, we can evolve into new patterns of organization — in work and society — where the talents, purpose, and long-term needs of all participants can be channeled to be sustainable, productive, and mutually-beneficial, and without the heavy hand of a class of leaders calling the shots. And of course, the cult of leadership couldn’t continue to flourish without the support of a class of leadership-obsessed followers spouting workist dogma, and dreaming of becoming leaders themselves one day.
For us to move past leadership to something else, there may have to be a long series of other foundational changes. No, let me make that stronger: there will have to be other foundational changes. And I intend to find out what they are.
I am dedicating myself to exploring these questions in a series of essays I’ll be writing over the next few months, which I hope to shape into a book. Consider this a preface to the preface.
I’ll be posing questions about the ways work is changing in the coming months, so if you’d like to join my research network and be part of that research, please sign up here: https://stoweboyd.typeform.com/to/iykboS.
