How the Mast Brothers fooled the world into paying $10 a bar for crappy hipster chocolate

Whether youve seen their beautifully wrapped bars for sale at Shake Shack or Rag & Bone, featured in the pages of the New York Times or Vogue, or decorating one of their New York, London, or soon, LA shops, Mast Brothers chocolate bars have become the worlds most prominent brand of artisanal chocolate.


But while customers cant get enough of the companys bearded, Brooklyn hipster founders, and their brilliantly marketed, $10 bean to bar chocolates, a term reserved for chocolate that has been produced entirely under the makers control, from the cocoa bean to the wrapped bar, chocolate experts have shunned them.


Earlier this year, Slate published a story on Rick and Michael Mast, detailing complaints by the craft chocolate community about their undeserved media attention and unparalleled hubris.


(I can affirm that we make the best chocolate in the world, Rick told Vanity Fair in February.)


Whether youve seen their beautifully wrapped bars for sale at Shake Shack or Rag & Bone, featured in the pages of the New York Times or Vogue, or decorating one of their New York, London, or soon, LA shops, Mast Brothers chocolate bars have become the worlds most prominent brand of artisanal chocolate.


But while customers cant get enough of the companys bearded, Brooklyn hipster founders, and their brilliantly marketed, $10 bean to bar chocolates, a term reserved for chocolate that has been produced entirely under the makers control, from the cocoa bean to the wrapped bar, chocolate experts have shunned them.


Earlier this year, Slate published a story on Rick and Michael Mast, detailing complaints by the craft chocolate community about their undeserved media attention and unparalleled hubris.


(I can affirm that we make the best chocolate in the world, Rick told Vanity Fair in February.)


But there is evidence that at least some of their early production involved remelting chocolate bought from Valrhona, a commercial French chocolate manufacturer.


In the chocolate community, the suspicions of remelting began early.


The Mast Brothers original bars had a taste and texture that was too much like the palate-friendly kind available at the drug store to be truly bean to bar, Scott explains in his first post.


Bean-to-bar chocolate has a distinctive taste that, like wine, ties it to its origin, and craft chocolate makers use minimal processing to retain that taste.


I was confident that they did not make the chocolate at that time, Aubrey Lindley, co-owner of craft chocolate shop Cacao in Portland, Oregon told Scott and confirmed to Quartz.


It had an overly refined, smooth texture that is a trademark of industrial chocolate.


No small equipment was achieving a texture like that.


It also tasted like industrial chocolate: balanced, flavorless, dark roast, and vanilla.


While multiple chocolate experts echoed these sentiments to both Scott and to Quartz, in part four of his series, Scott provides accounts from multiple sources who spoke to the Mastsover email, on the phone and in personabout their use of Valrhona chocolate.


In February 2008, Oklahoma chef Larry Gober reached out to Rick Mast about buying Mast Brothers chocolate, as shown in emails on the DallasFood blog and provided to Quartz.


He also asked where they were sourcing their chocolate from.


Rick told him that they mostly sourced from Venezuela, Ecuador, Dominican Republic and Madagascar.


We also receive cocoa paste from Valrhona that we will sometimes use as a base as we experiment with new recipes, they told him.


We are from bean to bar and hope to be exclusively bean to bar by the end of the year once our laboratory is complete..


But they also told other chocolate makers that they had included Valrhona chocolate in products.


On the phone with Alan McClure, founder of Patric Chocolate, a craft chocolate company formed in 2006, in the spring of 2008, Rick Mast admitted that they had used some remelted Valrhona chocolate but werent doing it any longer.


(McClure confirmed this conversation with Quartz.)


That June, though, Art Pollard, co-founder of the bean-to-bar chocolate company, Amano Artisan Chocolate, was introduced to the brothers as they were selling their bars at the Brooklyn Flea, a weekend flea market in New York, including a dark milk, Trinidad single-origin bar.


He had already heard about the brothers, and was curious to meet them.


He saw they were selling six varieties of bars.


I wasnt accusing, he tells Quartz.


I was just amazed they were able to pull that off right from the beginning.


Coming up with just a single new bar is a royal pain in the butt, he says.


He asked the then-beardless brothers about their sourcing since he had had trouble getting cocoa beans from Trinidad himself.


These three bars are ones that we made, the Masts told him.


And these other three, pointing to the single-origin and dark milk chocolate varieties, are Valrhona.


(Pollard told Quartz that other chocolate experts who were with him that day remember hearing those comments, but dont want to speak to the press.)


These accounts contradict the statement from the Mast Brothers PR team which stated, We made our chocolate from bean to bar when we started.


Similarly, in a response to an inquiry from Grub Street, the Mast Brothers wrote, Needless to say, we were then and are now a bean to bar chocolate maker.


Eventually, however, experts believe that Michael and Rick Mast did start making at least some of their own chocolate, and as Scott explains, the quality of their bars dropped.


The change was remarkable and obvious, Lindley, of the Cacao shop in Portland, says of trying the bars in 2010.


Most of the chocolate was simply inedible, by my standards.


The Mast Brothers are not as original and innovative as they have claimed

Part of the Mast Brothers story is that the brothers are self-taught chocolate-making MacGyvers, the first of their kind, inventing and rejiggering equipment to fit their chocolate needs.


Weve had to come up with how everything is done every step of the way because there was no such thing as small-batch chocolate makers, Rick told an Australian publication.


Their 2013 cookbook, Mast Brothers Chocolate: A Family Cookbook, describes roasting in a coffee drum roaster three pounds of beans at a time, cracking cacao shells with a hand mill used for crushing barley in home brewing, and winnow[ing] the husks from the nibs using fans, or even hair dryers.


Theres no such thing as commercial equipment for [small-batch chocolate making].


You cant say, Im going to start a small chocolate company and then go online and get a couple of machines, they told NPR in 2010.


The tour guide at the Williamsburg factory told Quartz that the brothers figured everything out themselves through trial and error, referencing only ancient Incan or Mayan (she couldnt remember which) techniques.


But in reality, by the time Michael and Rick started making and selling chocolate in 2007, there were already a number of American small-batch chocolate makers on the market, as one of the proprietors of those businesses, Shawn Askinosie of Askinosie Chocolate, wrote for the Huffington Post earlier this year.


Scharffen Berger was founded in 1997, Askinosie started in 2005, and Theo sold its first organic chocolate in 2006, just to name a few.


(In the cookbook the Mast brothers played a little safer, saying that when they started, barely a handful of companies were actually making chocolate from scratch in North America.)


In truth, despite their claim that they had come up with how everything is done every step of the way, the Masts picked up at least some of their knowledge on the thriving online community of chocolate makers that has existed for more than a decade.


A public website, Chocolate Alchemy, is a hub of information, where chocolate makers could trade tips and advice for making small-batch chocolate.


The website even included the tip about the blowdryer.


Its earliest posts are dated October 3, 2003.


This site is also where the brothers bought some of their first equipment, as the founder, John Nanci, has confirmed to Quartz.


In March 2009, on a tour of the first Williamsburg factory site, George Genslera co-founder of the Manhattan Chocolate Society and member of the Grand Jury for the International Chocolate Awardssaw and photographed the Crankandstein Cocoa Mill, developed in collaboration with Nanci specifically for the purpose of cracking cacao shells.


Nanci has confirmed to Quartz that he sold the machine to Michael Mast on March 13, 2008.


The note from Mast included in the order read, We cant thank you enough for all you have done.


Your site is amazing.


Mast also separately ordered a 70kg bag of organic cocoa beans from the Dominican Republic with the note Thanks for all of your incredible work and information.


We could never have done this without you.


Mast Brothers have executed a brilliant marketing strategy, but dont sell quality chocolate
To Georg Bernardini, author of ChocolateThe Reference Standard, aka The Chocolate Bible, which includes reviews of over 500 chocolate companies bars, the marketingnot the chocolateis Mast Brothers legacy.


It is not an ingenious story of passion for cocoa, instead a sophisticated marketing strategy, to earn as much money as possible as fast as possible, he writes in the 2015 edition.


Even beyond the allegations of not being truly bean-to-bar, all the chocolate makers and experts Quartz spoke to expressed a gripe about the Mast Brothers past and current lines: The chocolate just isnt very good.


This years tasting was anything but a pleasure, Bernardini writes in the 2015 edition of his chocolate guide.


The cocoa beans are virtually mistreated by the Mast Brothers.


Mark Christian of the C-Spot, a chocolate review website, was slightly kinder in his overall assessment, telling Quartz that it swings from good to bad.


Starts out quite enticing, takes an interim dive, then improves for awhile, now currently quite abysmal, he writes in an email.


Whether they ever again reach peak levels depends on their whim to shift attention back to hi-craft (outsourced or in-house) instead of concentrating overwhelmingly on the business of branding (quite a success).


The companys price of around $10 per bar is not unheard-of in the world of artisanal chocolate, but certainly on the higher end.


We charge $8 for most of our bars and our chocolate regularly receives awards in Europe for its taste and flavor, Pollard of Amano Artisan Chocolate told Quartz.


Charging $10 for a bar made with beans that are not highly prized should be an exception rather than the rule.


The paper the chocolate is wrapped in, on the other hand, Bernardini calls almost magnificent.


As Scott shows on Storify, for many fans, the packaging is the product.


The Mast Brothers have packaged themselves brilliantly as well.


The companys price of around $10 per bar is not unheard-of in the world of artisanal chocolate, but certainly on the higher end.


We charge $8 for most of our bars and our chocolate regularly receives awards in Europe for its taste and flavor, Pollard of Amano Artisan Chocolate told Quartz.


Charging $10 for a bar made with beans that are not highly prized should be an exception rather than the rule.


The paper the chocolate is wrapped in, on the other hand, Bernardini calls almost magnificent.


As Scott shows on Storify, for many fans, the packaging is the product.


The Mast Brothers have packaged themselves brilliantly as well.



