Life extension technology gives us a bleak future: more white men
I was raised in a household in which my mother, a divorced old-school feminist, openly hoped for the day when the racist, angry old white men, who keep our country in sociopolitical purgatory, would die.


In my youth, her mantra made me optimistic that the passing of time alone might alleviate some of our countrys most persistent conservative tendencies: hostility towards reproductive rights, demonization of the poor, environmental recklessness.


But almost 30 years later, shes still saying it, and given the United States (and the worlds) increasing population of old folkwhere whites continue to outlive people of color and education access creates huge gaps in life expectancyshe might be saying it until she dies.


Since 1840, life expectancy has been on a steady rise, but a recent CDC report created some alarm when it revealed that the death rate of whites in the U.S. increased slightly between 2013 and 2014 due to the murders, suicides, and alcohol and drug overdoses that canceled out gains in cancer and heart disease treatment.


What some reports failed to mention was that life expectancy for whites diverges along gender lines, with women in rural and small town settings coming out on the bottom.


If youre an American woman who lives into old age, youll probably be kept alive for longer than your grandparents thanks to medical advances.


But you have to make it through your 30s, 40s, and 50s first.


Its a reminder of what the World Health Organization has pointed out while advocating for better systems of national care: health inequalities are untouched by recent increases in life expectancy.


This coverage made me think of the burgeoning life extension craze thats set up shop in Silicon Valley courtesy of extremely rich white men who think the biggest health problem facing the countryand the worldisnt about access, education, bad policies, or wealth inequality but rather insufficiently aggressive medical advancements.


I first heard of the life extension movement more than a decade ago, when I met a fervent practitioner who took hundreds of vitamins and supplements each day.


His behavior seemed eccentric and harmless at the time, but as more members of our countrys .01%almost always male, and almost always whitebecome engaged in the attempt to draw out life spans, the potential dystopian consequences are harder to ignore.


While people of color, trans folks and the poor struggle to live within the timespan theyre allegedly already allotted by virtue of living in an industrialized nation, a handful of powerful white guys promote themselves as humanitarians for trying to extend the already long lives of the favored few.


There arent many futures more chilling to me than one in which not even the march of time can free us from our oligarchs.


Thats a little hyperbolic, I know, since most advocates for a radically extended lifespan dont believe actual immortality is achievable.


But establishing a much longer life expectancy, whether that means a life that lasts 120 years or 500 years, would demand solutions to many fresh problems: Who pays for the treatments that make prolonged life possible?


How would people afford basic expenses during their extra decades when theyre already struggling to provide for themselves now?


Would we be living more years only so we could work more years and if so, is the longer life bargain worth it?


There arent many futures more chilling to me than one in which not even the march of time can free us from our oligarchs.


Those are moot inquiries for the worlds richest citizens, which is why theyve not preoccupied themselves with providing answers.


The men who serve as the face of the movement arent doing it many favors to win hearts and minds.


Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison, whos spent almost half a billion dollars backing anti-aging research, has said death makes him very angry and that its incomprehensible: How can a person be there and then justnot be there?


(This is the type of juvenile reaction thats passed off as disruptive and bold inquiry among the tech genius set.)


Similarly, uber-rich libertarian Peter Thielin the news recently for spinning his personal vendetta against Gawker as philanthropyrepeatedly tells reporters the story of when he first learned of death at age three; his attitude toward mortality has been in a state of arrested development ever since.


When George Packer of The New Yorker prodded Thiel to comment on the access and affordability discrepancies life extending technologies might entail, Thiel delivered one of the most dismissive non-replies of all time: Probably the most extreme form of inequality is between people who are alive and people who are dead.


This cavalier vapidity led Packer to summarize Thiels vision of an ideal future as one in which a few thousand Americans  live to a hundred and fifty, while millions of others  perish at sixty.


Meanwhile, aspiring Renaissance man, Russian billionaire Dmitry Itskov, is devoted to pioneering cybernetic immortality by 2045 so he can finally have 10,000 years for numerous hobbies.


Which is a fine dream, but perhaps not a helpful one when juxtaposed against the fact that few fellow humans have the disposable income to fully devote themselves to even one hobby, let alone numerous ones.


Such immature self-interest is made more troubling by disingenuous attempts to conceal it, which often borrow from the rhetoric of socially conscious organizing.


Those most publicly engaged in staving off death frame their efforts as morally unimpeachable, conceived in a spirit of egalitarian benefit and heroic humanitarianism rather than borne of their own primitive existential struggles and egomania.


Bill Maris, who helped found Googles longevity-focused Calico Labs, creates a convenient false dichotomy between making a lot of money or finding a way to make people live longer, as if the technologies and medicines related to the latter wouldnt be hugely profitableCalico is a for-profit company, after allor as if the latter is less selfish.


(The goal is rarely making people in the abstract live longer; I just hope to live long enough not to die, Maris has said.)


Worse is the non-billionaire face of anti-aging promotion, British researcher Aubrey de Grey, who tars criticism as the symptom of a widespread pro-ageing trance that renders people complacent and foolish with regards to combating the scourge of age.


If not for that trance, wed all be agitating like righteous revolutionaries to put an end to the tyranny of organic lifes limits.


de Grey has implied that old people at peace with their mortality probably just arent getting [much] out of lifeno way are they mature, rational folks who led a life with which theyre content.


Most Americans arent interested in clinging to life at all costs, and most of us dont want to live much longer than we already do.


And, under the guise of fighting ageism, hes described opposition to or disinterest in life extension as a type of discrimination against the elderly and therefore an ethical failure.


These ideas are showcased in a piece he wrote for the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank co-founded by one of the cartoonish evil billionaireand at this point, quite oldKoch brothers.


Its within this essay that de Grey calls George W. Bush an icon of contemporary moral philosophy in an attempt to illustrate that even simpletons can recognize it is wise to always err on the side of life.


(I think.


Either that or he was being sincere, a possibility Im not uncharitable enough to consider.)


Furthermore, de Grey, and the foundation he cofounded, is explicitly critical of the amount of money spent on HIV and cancer compared to how much is invested in life extension in and of itself.


For he and his colleagues, its not just that extending life should be a medical priority, its that it should be the priority.


Google CEO Larry Page has also described anti-cancer efforts as not effective enough in improving life expectancy and suggested that cancer research is evidence of us not focus[ing] on the right thingsin spite of the fact that, because of the cell replication required to live, cancer is currently inevitable if a human lives for long enough.


de Gray recognizes the threat cancer proposes to long life-havers, but believes cancer can only be eliminated through eradication of a specific gene present in each cell of the human body, and subsequent stem cell treatments to deal with the considerable side effects.


If this sounds like it would be very expensive, dont worry; de Grey claims its inevitable that anti-aging treatments will be free and widely available.


(In his defense, he lives under the UKs health care system, not ours.)


Mostly, though, he ridicules questions regarding inequality as worthlessly speculative about the future, and deems them an unreasonable obstacle to research that should be undertaken regardless of its own wider-reaching implications.


Refusing to grapple with ethical and practical inquiries before pouring resources into a colossal project with a dubious benefit is, to me, far more irresponsible than allowing life to resolve in the natural way.


But for de Grey, death is an absolute ill and life an absolute good; if youre living, youre better off, no matter what your circumstances.


(Hes used the case of persistently vegetative Florida woman Terry Schiavo to raise the issue of whether its preferable to perpetuate ones life at all costs.


I suspect Im in considerable company when I say, no and also, maybe choose a different example.)


Most Americans arent interested in clinging to life at all costs, and most of us dont want to live much longer than we already do.


We (rightly) suspect that our quality of life will diminish as time passes, and feel guilty about further taxing the environment and finances of those left to care for us.


Thats not a pro-ageing trancethats common sense and basic decency.


Theres nothing objectively offensive about Ellison, Itskov, and Thiel wanting to live forever because theyre afraid to die or because their fortunes require centuries within which to be fully exhausted.


No matter how selfishly conceived, the research they fund might result in a host of discoveries with benefits even outside the range of its guiding purpose.


But it could also yield procedures and products available only to the most affluent and well-positioned among us, technologies that help these people further consolidate their wealth and power in dramatic ways.


Its not wrong for the rest of us to be suspicious or critical of their projects motives and execution.


And as Silicon Valley titans ignore their own water crisis while trying to devise ways for their individual, water-consuming selves to stick around for an extra century on top of all the new lives well be welcoming onto the planet, were equally justified in withholding the good Samaritan status they try to claim.


For an individual to opt out of death entirely has serious repercussions for everyone, and everything, else.


Its disconcerting to see intelligent people treat aging as a fundamental unsolved problem or a side-effect instead of an elegant solution to an ecosystem that entails living beings using limited resources.


Were finite because our resources are finite.


Life needs to be recycled so more life is perpetuated; just give a listen to The Circle of Life if you need refreshing on that point.


For an individual to opt out of death entirely has serious repercussions for everyone, and everything, else.


de Grey makes a valid point in arguing that many existing medical processes are methods of postponing deathand for years, the question has been posed as to whether we already live too long.


(Many misanthropes, environmentalists, and pragmatic thinkers say yes.)


Yet many medical processes are also, and sometimes primarily, concerned with alleviating suffering, a word that rarely comes up when life extension is at the fore.


Very few of us want to suffer or believe suffering serves a purpose.


But plenty people, Ellison and Thiel excepted, recognize the value of death and may want to die after they feel theyve sufficiently lived.


When I think about the nightmarish possibility of a world in which health care inequalities are even further exacerbated, two things come to mind.


The first is Dick Cheney, the former vice president, shooter-in-the-face of a friend, and ghoulish war criminal who received a heart transplant in 2012, at age 71, after struggling with his health for years.


During his time in office, it was something of a nation-wide joke that he would never die; here was a man as amoral and openly reviled a politician as the U.S. had ever seen, yet not even natural causes could rid us of him.


I imagine his natural lifespan prolonged far beyond the extra years hes already obtained through his disproportionate wealth and privilegea Dick Cheney who lasts another 30 years, another 50, another 100and I shudder.


The second is of one of my favorite bell hooks quotes: Women and children all over the world want men to die so they can live.


She delivers this line in the context of reflecting on how patriarchal power poisons men, and renders their very livesshaped by the toxic pressures of entitlement, violent tendencies, and unearned authorityantithetical to the ability of others to pursue fully realized and free self-determination.


Sometimes, living under the broken and unjust systems governing our country means a natural death seems like the best hope we have of sloughing off our worst fellow humans.


Its cold comfort, but its some comfort nonetheless.


Give me a world in which oligarchs and politicians are biologically incapable of staying in power for centuries or else, please, give me an early death.



