1Googles Demis Hassabis on using artificial intelligence on everything from climate change to aging.


The following is a condensed and edited interview with Demis Hassabis, CEO, DeepMind Technologies.


What does DeepMind do?


Our stated mission is to solve intelligence, and we use the word solve, because it can mean a few things.


1It means to understand intelligence, fundamentally understand it, and re-create it artificially.


If you look at how civilization has been built and everything humans have achieved, its down to our intelligence.


Its our minds that have set us apart.


1So it would seem if you could solve intelligence in this way Im talking about and make machines smart, then you could do all sorts of incredible things with that.


When you talk to Larry Page or other top executives at Google, are they saying, Where are we on this?


What is the status of our understanding of the brain?


Not quite.


I update them regularly, and we talk about the overall capabilities of the systems and where weve got them to, and then I might make some analogies to brain functions.


Its more that way around rather than querying about where we are on the road map.


We get discussions about at what point should we tackle language?


Its more that kind of question.


Or, if we think about robotics, at what point are we ready to do those things?


1Does that mean talking about technologies youre developing at DeepMind that may be ready to be used in Google products?


Yeah, thats right.


We will have discussions about that when certain capabilities arrive.


We think about OK, so what does that open up?


We do that on multiple levels when were talking to various VPs at Google and various product areas.


Thats already yielded some great results, actually.


I think I can talk about this now.


1Weve used AI to save like 15 percent of the power usage in the data centers, which is huge saving in terms of cost but also great for the environment.


They were very surprised, because theyd already optimized it.


I think it controls about 120 variables in the data centers.


The fans and the cooling systems and so on, and windows and other things, I think, as well.


They were pretty astounded.


We think there might be even more; it depends on how many sensors you put in.


Now that we know that works, we can maybe put more things in.


Youve said it could be decades before youve truly developed artificial general intelligence.


Do you think it will happen within your lifetime?


Well, it depends on how much sleep deprivation I keep getting, I think, because Im sure thats not good for your health.


So I am a little bit worried about that.


1I think its many decades away for full AI.


I think its feasible.


It could be done within our natural lifetimes, but it may be its the next generation.


It depends.


Id be surprised if it took more than, lets say, 100 years.


So once youve created a general intelligence, after having drunk the Champagne or whatever you do to celebrate, do you retire?


No.


No, because

You want to study science?


Yeah, thats right.


Thats what I really want to build the AI for.


Thats what Ive always dreamed about doing.


1Thats why Ive been working on AI my whole life: I see it as the fastest way to make amazing progress in science.


Say you succeed and create a super intelligence.


What happens next?


Do you donate the technology to the United Nations?


I think it should be.


Weve talked about this a lot.


Actually Eric Schmidt [executive chairman of Alphabet, Googles parent] has mentioned this.


Weve talked to him.


1We think that AI has to be used for the benefit of everyone.


1It should be used in a transparent way, and we should build it in an open way, which weve been doing with publishing everything we write.


There should be scrutiny and checks and balances on that.


1I think ultimately the control of this technology should belong to the world, and we need to think about how thats done.


Certainly, I think the benefits of it should accrue to everyone.


Again, there are some very tricky questions there and difficult things to go through, but certainly thats our belief of where things should go.


When you were a kid, what did you want to be when you grew up?


Oddly enough, since about the age of 11 or 12, Ive wanted to do this.


To be an AI researcher.


Around that age I was playing a lot of chess, and I was doing a lot of programming on my own.


One of the first big programs I remember writing around 11 years old was a program to play Othello, or Reversi maybe you call it in the U.S.


It was great, although it was a much less complex game.


I wrote a traditional alpha beta search.


I found a book on it, and I implemented it.


It was quite a good program.


It could beat my kid brother.


Your brother must have been furious.


He has great memories of it, actually.


He was my game tester and my guinea pig.


Basically, from then on I just thought, Wow, this would be so cool if you could get computers to think and reason and offload some of your thinking to it.


1There was one interesting thing that still tickles me now this idea of setting off your machine to do a task for you.


1Youre going to sleep, it continues to solve it, and you wake up, and there is the solution.


1It feels like an extension of your mind that you are able to continue to do work while youre asleep or even not thinking about the problem.


It seemed obvious to me if you could solve intelligence, then you could use it.


It would be like magic, like Arthur C. Clarke says.


1It does feel like the closest thing to magic, and I think we can use it for incredible good to solve all sorts of really pressing issues that we have, from climate to healthy aging and so on.


I think that having more intelligence in the world would be very useful.


Have you ever received any notably horrific advice?


Oh, wow.


Im not sure Ive been given any really horrific advice that stands out.


I probably would have just ignored it and deleted it from my mind if it was that bad.


Actually, in the past, probably during my Ph.D. when I was learning about how academia works, I remember talking to a few very senior scientists about the ability to organize science and top scientists in a different way.


Everyone was saying that will be totally impossible: Youll never get more than 20 researchers to work together in a productive way.


Ive been given that advice all the way as weve been building DeepMind.


It just hasnt held true.


The sum is greater than the individual parts.
