The So-Called Alien Megastructure Just Got Even More Mysterious

Last fall, a little-known star called KIC 8462852 became our planetary obsession when astronomers said that its erratic flickering could be the result of an alien megastructure.

Further observation of Tabbys Star yielded no signs of aliens, but the sudden dips in luminosity continue to defy explanation.

By carefully examining all the full-frame images collected during Keplers observational campaign, Montet and Simon discovered something astonishing: Not only did the stars light output occasionally dip by up to 20 percent, its total stellar flux diminished continuously over the course of four years.

For the first 1000 days of Keplers campaign, Tabbys Star decreased in luminosity by approximately 0.34 percent per year.

For the next 200 days, the star dimmed more rapidly, its total stellar flux dropping by 2 percent before leveling off.

Overall, Tabbys Star faded roughly 3 percent during the four years that Kepler stared at itan absolutely enormous, inexplicable amount.

The astronomers looked at 500 other stars in the vicinity, and saw nothing else like it.

He found that over the past 100 years, the stars total light output has diminished by a whopping 19 percent.

But shortly after publishing his claims, other astronomers started poking holes in them, saying that the observed dimming was the result of flawed data.

Jason Wright, the Penn State astronomer who first suggested that Tabbys Star might be the site of a vast alien construction project, agreed that the new analysis lends credibility to Schaefers claim of century-long dimming.

The new paper states, and I agree, that we dont have any really good models for this sort of behavior, he said.

Keivan Stassun, an astronomer at Vanderbilt who disputed the idea of long-term dimming, said that Tabbys star continues to defy explanation.

In the end, figuring out this puzzle may require accounting for a combination of effects.

Some of the most credible explanations to date include a swarm of cometary fragments, the effect of a distorted star, or the remnants of a shattered planet.

Certain things can explain long-term dimming while others can explain short-term flickering, but as Montet put it, nothing nicely explains everything.

Whats clear is that we arent going to solve this mystery until we get a better look at this star, which is exactly what Tabby Boyajianthe astronomer who first discovered itis gearing up to do.

